.. _G53MLE01:

=================
01 - Introduction
=================

Motivating Problems
-------------------

- Handwriting recognition
- Fingerprint recognition
- Face recognition

Can we program machines to learn to do these tasks?

Learning
--------

Learning is defined by a computer program improving with experience.

Handwriting Recognition Problem
-------------------------------

- Recognise handwritten characters
- Performance measured by **P**
- Training by experience **E** (database of correctly classified characters)
    - Prime the system with some experience, so that it can learn

We can represent each hand-written character by using an 8x8 grid, and storing
which cells in the grid are covered by the "ink", and which are not. This is
called the *Feature Vector* (**X**).

We combine this representation of the input with a representation of the
correct character (**D**).

Experience (**E**) is the combination of **X** with **D** (i.e. **E = (X,
D)**).

If, for example, the system could only represent 10 characters, then 5 could be
represented as (0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 1, 0, 0, 0, 0).

We then need to define a function **F** to map input **X** into the desired
classification of the character.

**F** will be a function of some adjustable parameters (or weights), which the
learning system can modify or learn. The system will therefore adapt to the
environment. **F(W, X) = D**.

Learning
^^^^^^^^

When training the system, the function is run with the training data (and
random weights), and the output is monitored. If the output is incorrect
(according to the training data), then the weights are adjusted until it is
correct.

Once the learning is complete, the paramaters/weights are fixed. From this
point on, an input is given and it's output is computed, but no adjustment is
made (as the correct value is not known).

Summary of Designing a Learning System
--------------------------------------

#. Collect training data
#. Represent the experience
#. Choose a representation for the "black box"
#. Learning (adjusting the weights)
#. Use/test the system
