============================
IP & Up 01 - Internetworking
============================

Recap
-----

- IP sits at layer 3 of the OSI model and of the internet stack
- It approximates a fully-connected network abstration
- IP packets are hop-by-hop routed by store-and-forward devices

Addressing
----------

Subnet masks were not used until CIDR came along, which separated the encoding
of the prefix length and the network/host addresses.

Routing
-------

When a router receieves a packet, it can either *drop* it, or *forward* it.
Routing is the process of forwarding packets onto a particular interface that
gets the packet **closer** to its destination.

Forwarding
----------

The *forwarding table* stores where each packet should go next, based on its
destination address.

The table must allow for fast lookups, and also updates to account for changes
in the rules.

When a packet is forwarded, the *time-to-live* field is decremented, so that
packets will eventually die if there is a routing loop.

Packets are also fragmented if necessary, if the destination network has
a lower MTU.

Fragmentation
-------------

* IP allows datagram sizes up to 64KB
* Physical networks often only support smaller frame types (MTU)
  - e.g. Ethernet 1500bytes, dialup PPP ~256bytes

Fragmentation may be done by the sending host, or an intermediate router. Each
fragment itself is an IP packet (with the same header, destination, etc.)

This is prevented with the IP "Do not fragment" flag.

Reassembly is done only by the ultimate destination of the packet, and only
after checking the header checksum, destination and ID (but before any other
processing). If one segment is lost, the entire packet is lost.
