.. _G54ACCUP02:

====================
IP & Up 02 - Routing
====================

What is Routing?
----------------

Routing is the process of building up information to enable forwarding.

It is a problem because of:

* Scalability: networks become large
* Dyanmics: need to handle host/link failures

IP Routing
----------

There are two different routing techniques for IP routing:

* Link-state routing
* Distance-vector routing

These are both equivalent, but make different trade-offs.

Technically, the third technique is static routing, but that's trivial!

Link-State Routing
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Two common implementations:

* Open Shortest Path First (OSPF)
* Intermediate-System Intermediate System (IS-IS)

...and they have three phases:

#. Determine link status (HELLO)
#. Broadcase link status (UPDATE)
#. Compute and install shortest paths

Determining Link State
""""""""""""""""""""""

Uses a three-way handshake across each link to determine if it is alive.

This runs periodically to ensure that the link is still up. Therefore, each
router knows to whom it's connected.

Broadcast Link State
""""""""""""""""""""

Each router summarises it's view of the network, and forwards that on to the
other routers. Each prefix is represented as a link.

In practice, this is quite complex, due to versioning, summarisation, loop
detection etc.

As a result, each router eventually knows to whom others are connected.

Compute & Install Shortest Paths
""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""

Each router can now run a standard shortest-path algorithm on it's view of the
network (Dijksta, for example).

The best *next hop* is then computed for each prefix, so the router knows what
to do when a packet arrives.

Distance-Vector Routing
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

In DV routing, routers co-operate in the computation of the shortest path,
which should (if the network is stable) converge.

Each router broadcasts the lowest cost for each link to all known destinations.
Packets are then forwarded on the port from which the best "advert" was heard.

RIP is an implementation of DV routing.

Comparison
^^^^^^^^^^

Link-State routing is in essence *centralized* computation, whereas
Distance-Vector routing is *distributed* computation.

Inter-Network Routing
---------------------

The distinction between *global* and *local* networks must be made. There are
different protocols for these different types of network:

* IGP - Interior Gateway Protocol
* EGP - Exterior Gateway Protocol

Information propogation must be scoped to provide protection (so internal
network information is not broadcasted outside the network).

BGP
^^^

Border Gateway Protocol, v4 (BGPv4).

BGP is essentially a Distance-Vector protocol, with extra bits added on.

It provides another layer: the AS (Autonomous System). This identifies
a network, and is purely administrative (not relevant to the data plane).

The distance is defined as the number of AS's that the packet must traverse.
This is a so-called *path vector*.

The purpose of BGP is to enable *policy* to be applied.

The Protocol
""""""""""""

OPEN
    Sets up *sessions* between *peers*.

UPDATE
    Indicates withdrawn routes, shared attributes, advertised routes.

Alternatives
------------

Source Routing
    Let the source host decide the exact route that the packet should take.
    This requires the host to know the network topology, and also has to be
    trusted.

Location-Based Routing
    Use, for example, physical distance between routers to pick the best route
    (using GPS).

Map-Based
    Build a detailed picture for parts of the network that are nearby, and
    a less detailed picture for others parts. Basically a compromise between
    LS and DV.
