.. _G54ACCUP03:

=============================
IP & Up 03 - Transport Basics
=============================

The Transport Layer
-------------------

Process-to-process communication

UDP
    User Datagram Protocol - best effort, unordered, datagrams

TCP
    Transmission Control Protocol - Reliable, ordered, byte-stream (with
    respect to the *process*, not the host

Ports
^^^^^

Ports provide multiplexing of a host's network connection between processes

::

    (src IP, dst IP, src pt, dst pt, protocol)

This 5-tuple uniquely identifies a *flow* on the internet

0 - 1023
    Well known, usually require root

1024 - 49151
    Registered, often out-of-date

49152 - 65535
    Dynamic/private/ephemeral ports

User Datagram Protocol
----------------------

Very simple transport protocol, provides simple datagrams over IP packets. Also
adds a *datagram checksum* and ports.

The checksum gives some reliability, but it's not great.

Transmission Control Protocol
-----------------------------

TCP is reliable, as data will be retransmitted if it is lost.

It is also ordered, so data is guaranteed to arrive in the order it was sent.

It provides a *byte stream*, so there is no need for the application to segment
data. However, it is common to insert delimiters.

There is a key problem here, however: the network is **asynchronous**. When
should a packet be considered lost, as it may just be taking a long time to
arrive. This means that the setting of lots of timers is essential.

In summary, the asynchrony of the network and the bidirectional communication
that TCP allows make the whole process very tricky.

Reliability
^^^^^^^^^^^

Retransmit data when it gets lost. Three problems:

* Detect the loss
* Avoid loss due to host congestion
* Avoid loss due to network congestion

Detect loss via the sequence numbers:

Sender and receiver send their own seqno's.

The sender can then detect how far the receiver is through the stream.

Timeouts
^^^^^^^^

How long should we wait to retransmit data?

RTT
    Round-trip time estimation (exponential average)

RTO
    Retransmission time-out: computed by standard deviation, and is rather
    expensive to calculate.

Flow Control
^^^^^^^^^^^^

The receiver needs to put the data it's receiving somewhere, and this is
usually down to the operating system on the host. Buffer management is
therefore required to allow the process that needs that data to access it.

The receiver advertises it's unused buffer space in the ACK packet (awnd). This
enables the transmitter to avoid sending so much that the receiver will be
forced to drop it.
