.. _G54ACCUP07:

==================================
IP & Up 07 - IP Network Management
==================================

What is Network Management?
---------------------------

Computer networks are considered to have three operating timescales:

* Data: packet forwarding (microseconds, milliseconds)
* Control: flows/connections (seconds, minutes)
* Management: aggregates, networks (hours, days)

Abstractions
------------

ISO FCAPS (functional separation):

Fault
    Recognize, isolate, correct & log
Configuration
    Collect, store & track
Accounting
    Collect statistics, bull users & enforce quotas
Performance
    Monitor trends, set thresholds & trigger alarms
Security
    Identify, secure & manage risks

TMN EMS (administrative separation):

Telecommunications Management Network
Element Management System

* network element management
* element management
* network management
* service management
* business management

These both attempt to model general communication networks, and tend to be
quite abstract and tedious.

Basic need-to-know requirements:

1. What should be happening?
2. What is happening?
3. What shouldn't be happening?
4. What will be happening?

IP Network Components
---------------------

1. Buy or lease routers ($1 or $2m for a new & populated backbone router!)
2. Buy or lease fibre (wayleaves cost lots!)
3. Connect them together
4. Configure routers
5. Configure end-systems

Router Flavours
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Core
    OC-12 (622Mbps) and up (to OC-768 ~= 40Gbps)
    Big and fast, but expensive
    HFRL 1.2Tbps each, with up to 72 interconnected giving 92Tbps
Transit/Peering links
    OC-3 and up
    ACLs, full-on BGP, uRPF and accounting
Customer Facing
    Frame relay/ATM
    Same feature set as transit routers, but with fancy queues etc.
Broadband Aggregator
    High scalability: sessions, ports, reconnections etc.
Customer-premises (CPE)
    Maybe 100Mbps
    NAT, DHCP, firewall, wireless, VoIP etc.
    Low cost and low end, maybe just software on a PC

Network Design Constraints
--------------------------

Business
    Backwards compatibility, who to connect to, peering etc.
Technology
    Power (directly i.e. 24x7 operation and indirectly i.e. cooling)
    Port density vs. bandwidth
    Software reliability
    Hardware/software capability
Connectivity/resiliency
    "All core routers connect to at least 2 other core routers"
    "All edge routers connect to at least 2 core routers"

Network Management Protocols
----------------------------

ICMP
^^^^

Internet Control Message Protocol - IP Protocol #1.

A variety of control messages i.e. PING.

Traceroute
^^^^^^^^^^

Sends UDP packets with increasing TTL values. Compliant IP host must respond
with ICMP "time exceeded". Triggers each host along the path.

SNMP
^^^^

Protocol to manage information tables at devices. Provides get, set, trap and
notify operations.

Complexity is mostly in the MIB design.

IPFIX
^^^^^

IETF working group. Export of flow based data out of IP network devices.

Statistics reporting etc.
