.. _G54ACCUP10:

========================================
IP & Up 10 - Abstractions & 3G Evolution
========================================

System Design
-------------

The art and science of extracting what you can from what you have.

The goals of system design are often not well-formed. For example scalability,
modularity, extensibility, elegance are subjective.

System Constraints
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

* Design
    * Bottleneck resource (the most constrained element)
    * Scaling (to infinity...)
* Resources
    * Latency (i.e. the speed of light is a hard limit)
    * Throughput & capacity
    * Money (ha!)

Social Constraints
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

* Standards compliance (legal implications)
* Market conditions (economic sustainability etc.)
* Labour availability
* Future proofing

Common Techniques
-----------------

Layering & Tunneling
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Controlling complexity by restricting component interactions. This is effecting
simplicity at the cost of performance. Often can also benefit from layer
violation(s).

Protocols need not always be strictly layered (as in protocol heaps).

Extensibility
^^^^^^^^^^^^^

We don't have the ability of knowing how our creations will be used (i.e. how
people will decide to use protocols or networks).

Therefore, we need to allow for future growth and upgrade. For this, we can use
"ships in the night" technique (run two protocols side-by-side), or integrated
operation. Also things like version fields can be useful.

Hierarchy
^^^^^^^^^

Recursive decomposition into smaller pieces, with each piece typically depending
on it's parent.

Binding & Indirection
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Translating from abstraction to instance:
 * Computation vs. lookup
 * Distributed vs. centralised lookup

E.g. DNS

State Management
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Soft state:
    * Requires refreshing else deleted on timer
    * Increased bandwidth for automatic cleanup after failure

Explicit state:
    * Easier to interpret, manage, and error-protect

For example, link-state vs. distance vector routing

Randomization
^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Can be a powerful tool for tie-breaking and security. It is used up and down
the stack for things like Ethernet collisions, nonces, router election etc.

Operating Timescales
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Not all operations need to be equally fast, or have the same granularity (e.g.
once per packet vs. once per communication).

Data vs. control vs. management.

3G Data Network Evolution
-------------------------

EPC (Enhanced Packet Core) Data Networks
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The vision is to provide continuous IP connectivity on resource constrained
devices, with a single radio on battery power, and while
geographically/logically mobile. Also, detailed control and management is
required.

Basic LTE Operation
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Transmit:

* Device registers with network
* Obtains configuration (address, server gateway, etc.)
* Network signals bearers (tunnels) to be set up

Receive:

* MME pages server gateways for the client device
* Device responds, settings up the bearers via server gateway

Different Style
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The network is much more intelligent than a "dumb" network like the internet.
Therefore it's much more complex, with things like accounting being required.

Signal Measuremen
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Base stations may overlap, so its difficult for the device to pick which one to
use.

The base station creates idle slots to enable devices to measure the signal
strength. This is because the device can only be guaranteed to have a maximum
of 1 radio, and can't do simultaneous tx/rx, and can't be on multiple RANs at
the same time.

Idle Mode
^^^^^^^^^

The device can go into idle mode to save power. In this state, it will still
send periodic updates to the network.

The server gateway buffers packets for the device while it is paged by the MME.

Tracking Areas
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The device is given a list of base stations in a given tracking area. The
device notifies the network if it changes tracking area.

To prevent against burst load which could occur when a train full of phones
switches from one base station to another, a different list of base stations is
given out to each device in a given tracking area. This spreads the load out on
base stations. The process can be further optimized using movement prediction.

Pooling
^^^^^^^

In 2G and 3G, a hierarchical core is used (a device connects to one base
station in a cell).

In EPC, there is a pool of weighted MMEs in a region. This enables base
stations to distribute load across MMEs. Also, it makes more efficient use of
statistical multiplexing.
