.. _G54ACCUP11:

=====================
IP & Up 11 - Revision
=====================

**What is ARP and what function does it perform?**

ARP resolves IP addresses to MAC addresses (Address Resolution Protocol)

**What is an IP subnet and what function does it serve?**

An IP subnet is a section of an IP network whereby hosts can communicate
without the packets being passing through a router. This serves to separate
broadcast domains, and therefore limit broadcast traffic exiting that section
of the network.

*An aggregate of IP addresses. 192.168.1.2 is an ip address, in the subnet
containing 192.168.1.0 - 192.168.1.255*

**Illustrate ARP on a simple ethernet with 3 hosts on the same subnet connected
via a hub**

* Host A wishes to communicate with host B, so it sends a message to the
  broadcast MAC (ff:ff:ff:ff:ff:ff), asking who has host B's IP address.
* Host B responds to host A with a message signifying that it has that IP,
  and the hosts begin to communicate.


**The hub is replaced with a router, and one host is a web server. Show the
sequence of events for fetching a web page**

* Host A does not have an IP, so it broadcasts a DHCP request (to
  255.255.255.255, ff:ff:ff:ff:ff:ff).
* The DHCP server responds with an IP for Host A to use, and network
  information such as the default gateway and DNS server(s)
* Host A realises that the web server's IP is on a different subnet, so it
  looks in the routing table for where to send the packet.
* The default gateway is the only option, so it broadcasts an ARP request for
  the DG's IP
* A TCP connection is setup between host A and the server, using the IP
  destination of the server, but the ethernet destination of the *router*
  (SYN-SYNACK-ACK)
* Host A sends the HTTP request to the server using the TCP connection
* The server must respond, so it looks in the routing table in the same way. DG
  is the only option, so the same process insues
* HTTP response is sent back to host A from web server
